Diffusion is the net movement of molecules or atoms from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration as a result of random motion of the molecules or atoms (so diffusion is  exhange of gases and water)
gaseous exchange of oxygen and co2 in cells is due to diffusion.


Osmosis : movement of a solvent (such as water) through a semipermeable membrane (as of a living cell) into a solution of higher solute concentration that tends to equalize the concentrations of solute on the two sides of the membrane.

hypotonic solution - low in concentration (in water egg swallows)
isotonic solution - same conc.(in low conc. same as that of = as of egg )
hypertonic solution. - high conc.  shrink (egg shrinks in high concentrated salt/sugar solution)

osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane

Absorption of water by plant roots by osmosis
Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water through osmosis.

Cell

    Cell is structural and functional unit of life.
    Amoeba Chlamydomonas Paramoecium and bacteria are unicellular
    shape of a cell depends upon its  function.
    different parts of cell (ORGANELLS) perform different function CALLED division of labour
    (Each cell thus acquires its structure and ability to function because of the organisation of its membrane and organelles in specific ways. The cell thus has a basic structural organisation. This helps the cells to perform functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, and clearing of waste material, or forming new proteins.)


PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE

    It is made up of organic molecules called lipids and proteins.
    The plasma membrane is selectively permeableIt allows flow of molecules through diffusion and osmosis.
    It is flexible to allow engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Amoeba
    acquires its food through such processes endocytosis.

Cell Wall

    It is present only in plant cells.
     It is made of cellulose and provides structural strength to plants.
    Plasmolysis is the process in which cells lose water in a hypertonic solution (less conc. soln.)
    It helps plant cells withstand much greater changes in the surrounding through osmosis and equal pressure exerted by its walls.


Nucleus

    It has double layered covering called nuclear membrane which has pores which allow the transfer of material from inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm
    Chromosomes present in the nucleus are rod like structures visible during cell division
    Chromosomes contain infor mation for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the information necessary for constructing and organising cells.
    Functional segments of DNA are called genes.
     some organisms like bacteria have no nuclear memberan and have only the nucleic acids called nucleoid such organisms are called prokaryotes
    Organisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes
    Nucleus has crucial role in cell division and in determining the way the cell will develop


Cytoplasm

    It is fluid inside the plasma membrane
    It contains the organells


endoplasmic reticulum (ER)

    The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large network of membrane-bound tubes and sheets.
    There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER).
    RER looks rough as it has particles called ribosomes attached to its surface. The ribosomes, which are present in all active cells, are the sites of protein synthesis.
    The manufactured proteins are then sent to various places in the cell depending on need, using the ER.
    The SER helps in the manufacture of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these proteins and lipids help in building the cell membrane called membrane biogenesis
    ER transports materials (especially proteins) between various regions of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm and the nucleus
    ER has a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons and drugs in liver cells of vertebrates.


Golgi Apparatus

    They are Membrane bound vesicles , parallel in stacks called cisterns
    They are connected to ER memberane
    They sotre, pack and dispatch material produced near ER to inside or outside the cell.
    convert simple sugars to complex sugars
    They form lysosomes

Lysosomes

    They are membrane-bound sacs filled with digestive enzymes made by RER.
    They Digest worn out cells, old organells, foreign material, food, bacteria, by breaking down the complex substances into simpler substances.
    When a cell is damaged it bursts and its digestive enzyme digests its own cell and hence called  ‘suicide bags’ of a cell


Mitochondria

    They are known as the powerhouses of the cell.
    Mitochondria have two membrane coverings. The outer membrane is porous while the inner membrane is deeply folded.These folds increase surface area for ATP (Adenosine triphopshate) molecules.
    ATP is known as the energy currency of the
    cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for
    making new chemical compounds and for
    mechanical work.
     they have their own DNA and
    ribosomes to make some of their own proteins.


Plastids

    Plastids are present only in plant cells.
    There are two types of plastids – chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or colourless plastids).
    Chromoplasts containing the pigment chlorophyll are known as chloroplasts.
    Chloroplasts are important for photosynthesis in plants.
    Chloroplasts also contain various yellow or orange pigments in addition to chlorophyll.
    Leucoplasts are primarily organelles in which materials such as starch, oils and protein granules are stored.
    The internal organisation of the Chloroplast consists of numerous membrane layers embedded in a material called the stroma. These are similar to mitochondria in external structure.
    Like the mitochondria, plastids also have their own DNA and ribosomes


Vacuoles

    Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid contents.
    Vacuoles are small sized in animal cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles .
    The central vacuole of some plant cells may occupy 50-90% of the cell volume.
    In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell.
    Many substances of importance in the life of the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic acids and some proteins.
    In single-celled organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole contains the food items that the Amoeba has consumed.
    In some unicellular organisms, specialised vacuoles also play important roles in expelling excess water and some wastes from the cell.

Cell Division

New cells formed in organisms in order to grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells.
The process by which new cells are made is called cell division.
There are two main types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis.

Mitosis

    The process of cell division by which most of the cells divide for growth and repair of tissues in organisms is called mitosis.
    In this process, each cell called mother cell divides to form two identical daughter cells.
    The daughter cells have the same number of chromosomes as mother cell. 


Meiosis

    New cells formed to  form gametes required for reproduction.
    Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues in animals and plants divide to form gametes, which after fertilisation give rise to offspring.
    They divide by a different process called meiosis.
    Meiosis involves two consecutive divisions.
    When a cell divides by meiosis it produces four new cells instead of just two.
    The new cells only have half the number of chromosomes than that of the mother cells.
